Frantz Fanon, 1961
The Wretched of the Earth
Chapter 6. Conclusion

Source: Les damnés de la terre by François Maspéro éditeur in 1961;
First published: in Great Britain by Macgibbon and Kee in 1965;
Transcribed: by Dominic Tweedie.

Come, then, comrades; it would be as well to decide at once to change our
ways. We must shake off the heavy darkness in which we were plunged, and leave
it behind. The new day which is already at hand must find us firm, prudent and
resolute.

We must leave our dreams and abandon our old beliefs and friendships of the
time before life began. Let us waste no time in sterile litanies and
nauseating mimicry. Leave this Europe where they are never done talking of
Man, yet murder men everywhere they find them, at the corner of every one of
their own streets, in all the corners of the globe. For centuries they have
stifled almost the whole of humanity in the name of a so-called spiritual
experience. Look at them today swaying between atomic and spiritual
disintegration.

And yet it may be said that Europe has been successful in as much as
everything that she has attempted has succeeded.

Europe undertook the leadership of the world with ardour, cynicism and
violence. Look at how the shadow of her palaces stretches out ever farther!
Every one of her movements has burst the bounds of space and thought. Europe
has declined all humility and all modesty; but she has also set her face
against all solicitude and all tenderness.

She has only shown herself parsimonious and niggardly where men are concerned;
it is only men that she has killed and devoured.

So, my brothers, how is it that we do not understand that we have better
things to do than to follow that same Europe?

That same Europe where they were never done talking of Man, and where they
never stopped proclaiming that they were only anxious for the welfare of Man:
today we know with what sufferings humanity has paid for every one of their
triumphs of the mind.

Come, then, comrades, the European game has finally ended; we must find
something different. We today can do everything, so long as we do not imitate
Europe, so long as we are not obsessed by the desire to catch up with Europe.

Europe now lives at such a mad, reckless pace that she has shaken off all
guidance and all reason, and she is running headlong into the abyss; we would
do well to avoid it with all possible speed.

Yet it is very true that we need a model, and that we want blueprints and
examples. For many among us the European model is the most inspiring. We have
therefore seen in the preceding pages to what mortifying set-backs such an
imitation has led us. European achievements, European techniques and the
European style ought no longer to tempt us and to throw us off our balance.

When I search for Man in the technique and the style of Europe, I see only a
succession of negations of man, and an avalanche of murders.

The human condition, plans for mankind and collaboration between men in those
tasks which increase the sum total of humanity are new problems, which demand
true inventions.

Let us decide not to imitate Europe; let us combine our muscles and our brains
in a new direction. Let us try to create the whole man, whom Europe has been
incapable of bringing to triumphant birth.

Two centuries ago, a former European colony decided to catch up with Europe.
It succeeded so well that the United States of America became a monster, in
which the taints, the sickness and the inhumanity of Europe have grown to
appalling dimensions.

Comrades, have we not other work to do than to create a third Europe? The West
saw itself as a spiritual adventure. It is in the name of the spirit, in the
name of the spirit of Europe, that Europe has made her encroachments, that she
has justified her crimes and legitimized the slavery in which she holds
four-fifths of humanity.

Yes, the European spirit has strange roots. All European thought has unfolded
in places which were increasingly more deserted and more encircled by
precipices; and thus it was that the custom grew up in those places of very
seldom meeting man.

A permanent dialogue with oneself and an increasingly obscene narcissism never
ceased to prepare the way for a half delirious state, where intellectual work
became suffering and the reality was not at all that of a living man, working
and creating himself, but rather words, different combinations of words, and
the tensions springing from the meanings contained in words. Yet some
Europeans were found to urge the European workers to shatter this narcissism
and to break with this un-reality.

But in general the workers of Europe have not replied to these calls; for the
workers believe, too, that they are part of the prodigious adventure of the
European spirit.

All the elements of a solution to the great problems of humanity have, at
different times, existed in European thought. But Europeans have not carried
out in practice the mission which fell to them, which consisted of bringing
their whole weight to bear violently upon these elements, of modifying their
arrangement and their nature, of changing them and, finally, of bringing the
problem of mankind to an infinitely higher plane.

Today, we are present at the stasis of Europe. Comrades, let us flee from this
motionless movement where gradually dialectic is changing into the logic of
equilibrium. Let us reconsider the question of mankind. Let us reconsider the
question of cerebral reality and of the cerebral mass of all humanity, whose
connexions must be increased, whose channels must be diversified and whose
messages must be re-humanized.

Come, brothers, we have far too much work to do for us to play the game of
rear-guard. Europe has done what she set out to do and on the whole she has
done it well; let us stop blaming her, but let us say to her firmly that she
should not make such a song and dance about it. We have no more to fear; so
let us stop envying her.

The Third World today faces Europe like a colossal mass whose aim should be to
try to resolve the problems to which Europe has not been able to find the
answers.

But let us be clear: what matters is to stop talking about output, and
intensification, and the rhythm of work.

No, there is no question of a return to Nature. It is simply a very concrete
question of not dragging men towards mutilation, of not imposing upon the
brain rhythms which very quickly obliterate it and wreck it. The pretext of
catching up must not be used to push man around, to tear him away from himself
or from his privacy, to break and kill him.

No, we do not want to catch up with anyone. What we want to do is to go
forward all the time, night and day, in the company of Man, in the company of
all men. The caravan should not be stretched out, for in that case each line
will hardly see those who precede it; and men who no longer recognize each
other meet less and less together, and talk to each other less and less.

It is a question of the Third World starting a new history of Man, a history
which will have regard to the sometimes prodigious theses which Europe has put
forward, but which will also not forget Europe’s crimes, of which the most
horrible was committed in the heart of man, and consisted of the pathological
tearing apart of his functions and the crumbling away of his unity. And in the
framework of the collectivity there were the differentiations, the
stratification and the bloodthirsty tensions fed by classes; and finally, on
the immense scale of humanity, there were racial hatreds, slavery,
exploitation and above all the bloodless genocide which consisted in the
setting aside of fifteen thousand millions of men.

So, comrades, let us not pay tribute to Europe by creating states,
institutions and societies which draw their inspiration from her.

Humanity is waiting for something other from us than such an imitation, which
would be almost an obscene caricature.

If we want to turn Africa into a new Europe, and America into a new Europe,
then let us leave the destiny of our countries to Europeans. They will know
how to do it better than the most gifted among us.

But if we want humanity to advance a step farther, if we want to bring it up
to a different level than that which Europe has shown it, then we must invent
and we must make discoveries.

If we wish to live up to our peoples’ expectations, we must seek the response
elsewhere than in Europe.

Moreover, if we wish to reply to the expectations of the people of Europe, it
is no good sending them back a reflection, even an ideal reflection, of their
society and their thought with which from time to time they feel immeasurably
sickened.

For Europe, for ourselves and for humanity, comrades, we must turn over a new
leaf, we must work out new concepts, and try to set afoot a new man.

Frantz Fanon | Marxism and Anti-Imperialism in Africa

